proposal: pipeline (#476)
kurator-dev/kurator: docs/proposals/pipeline/pipeline.md

proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

The design will focus on creating a user interface within Kurator that interacts seamlessly with Tekton's backend. 
The interface will provide options to select, customize, and deploy Pipeline templates. 
The pipeline controller will auto transform kurator pipeline into Tekton custom resources.

#### API Design

In this section, we delve into the detailed API designs for Pipeline

##### Pipeline API

Here's the preliminary design for the Unified Backup API:

```console
package v1alpha1

import (
	tektonv1 "github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pkg/apis/pipeline/v1"
	corev1 "k8s.io/api/core/v1"
	metav1 "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1"
)

// Pipeline is the top-level type for Kurator CI Pipeline.
type Pipeline struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	Spec   PipelineSpec   `json:"spec"`
	Status PipelineStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// PipelineSpec defines the desired state of a Pipeline.
type PipelineSpec struct {
	// Description allows an administrator to provide a description of the pipeline.
	// +optional

> 	Description *string `json:"description,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Why need a pointer to string

Author: string has a zero value rather than `nil` value 

see 
https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/586efe08f05f5bee1ba424ecd53394a16ca54618/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md?plain=1#L866-L867

Reviewer: I dont think we need to distinguish "" and nil. They are same here, as we won't generate a default value for it

Author: ok，

> 	// Tasks is a list of tasks in the pipeline, containing detailed information about each task.

Reviewer: ordered list of tasks, and  add that they will run in order

Author: ok

	Tasks []PipelineTask `json:"tasks"`

	// SharedWorkspace is the name of the PVC. If not specified, a PVC with the Pipeline's name as prefix will be created by default.
	// if not set, Kurator will create a pvc named Pipeline.name using default config
	// +optional
	SharedWorkspace *string `json:"sharedWorkspace,omitempty"`

> 	// Results are the list of results written out by the pipeline task's containers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Results are the list of results written out by the pipeline's task
```

Reviewer: The comments is vague, better provide a demo showing how result can be propagated

Author: we will remove the `result`, because it is vague for user and not necessary

	// +optional
	// +listType=atomic

> 	Results []tektonv1.PipelineRunResult `json:"results,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Suggest we donot its struct directly, we should reduce the dependency on projects. Currently we have a great difficulty to bump dependency

Author: I plan to remove the field `Results `, as I've determined it's no longer necessary to expose it to the user.

}

type PipelineTask struct {
	// Name is the name of the task.
	Name string `json:"name"`

	// PredefinedTask is a reference to a predefined task template.
	// Users should provide a PredefinedTask name from a predefined library.
	// +optional
	PredefinedTask *PredefinedTask `json:"predefinedTask,omitempty"`

> 	// CustomTask enables defining a task directly within the CRD if TaskRef is not used.

Author: IMHO，maybe the origin one is better

	// This should only be used when TaskRef is not provided.
	// +optional
	CustomTask *CustomTask `json:"customTask,omitempty"`

	// Retries represents how many times this task should be retried in case of task failure.
	// +optional
	Retries *int `json:"retries,omitempty"`
}

type PredefinedTask struct {

> 	// TaskType is used to specify the type of the predefined task.

Author: They are essentially the same.

	// These parameters depend on the selected task template.
	// +optional
	Params map[string]string `json:"params,omitempty"`
}

// CustomTask defines the specification for a user-defined task.
type CustomTask struct {
	// Image specifies the Docker image name.
	// More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/images
	// +optional
	Image string `json:"image,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=image"`

	// Command is the entrypoint array. It's not executed in a shell.
	// If not provided, the image's ENTRYPOINT is used.
	// Environment variables can be used in the format $(VAR_NAME).
	// More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/define-command-argument-container/#running-a-command-in-a-shell
	// +optional
	// +listType=atomic
	Command []string `json:"command,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,3,rep,name=command"`

	// Args are the arguments for the entrypoint.
	// If not provided, the image's CMD is used.
	// Supports environment variable expansion in the format $(VAR_NAME).
	// More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/define-command-argument-container/#running-a-command-in-a-shell
	// +optional
	// +listType=atomic

> 	Args []string `json:"args,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,4,rep,name=args"`

Author: you mean  `json:"args,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,4,rep,name=args"`？ actually，they are all the tag to define how the Args field is to be serialized

	// Step's working directory.
	// If not specified, the container runtime's default will be used, which
	// might be configured in the container image.
	// Cannot be updated.
	// +optional
	WorkingDir string `json:"workingDir,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,5,opt,name=workingDir"`
	// List of environment variables to set in the Step.
	// Cannot be updated.
	// +optional
	// +patchMergeKey=name
	// +patchStrategy=merge
	// +listType=atomic
	Env []corev1.EnvVar `json:"env,omitempty" patchStrategy:"merge" patchMergeKey:"name" protobuf:"bytes,7,rep,name=env"`
	// ResourceRequirements required by this Step.
	// Cannot be updated.
	// More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/
	// +optional
	ResourceRequirements corev1.ResourceRequirements `json:"computeResources,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,8,opt,name=computeResources"`
	// Script is the contents of an executable file to execute.
	//

> 	// If Script is not empty, the Step cannot have a Command and the Args will be passed to the Script.

Reviewer: `the Step` means the task

Author: yes, it is `CustomTask`

	// +optional
	Script string `json:"script,omitempty"`
}

type PipelineStatus struct {
	// Phase describes the overall state of the Pipeline.
	// +optional
	Phase *string `json:"phase,omitempty"`
	
	// EventListenerServiceURL provides a direct URL or address of the service
	// +optional
	EventListenerServiceURL string `json:"serviceURL,omitempty"`
}

```

#### How to use pipeline

![use-pipeline](./image/use-pipeline.svg)

#### How to trigger pipeline

![trigger](./image/trigger.svg)

#### pipelineRun example

![pipelinerun-example](./image/pipelinerun-example.svg)

#### Supply Chain Security

##### SLSA Level 2 Key Requirements

1. **Verifiable Signatures**:

    SLSA Level 2 requires verifiable signatures associated with artifacts (like software packages, container images) to ensure their authenticity and integrity.

2. **Complete Build Process Records**:

>     Detailed documentation of the entire build process, including inputs and outputs. These records, known as "provenance", provide transparency in artifact creation.

Author: IMHO，they are essentially the same.

1. **Generating Provenance**:

    Upon completion of a Pipeline, Tekton Chains automatically generates a detailed provenance for each `PipelineRun`. This includes key information like inputs and outputs of the build process.

2. **Automating Signature Creation**:

    Tekton Chains then generates a digital signature for this provenance, ensuring its authenticity and integrity, rather than directly signing the artifact.

##### User Verification

Users can verify the authenticity of the provenance and its signature before using an artifact, ensuring it was created through a verified build process, thus enhancing security.

#### Kurator Pipeline cli

##### 1. Pipeline Commands

- **`pipeline list`**
  
    Display all current Pipelines.

- **`pipeline describe <name>`**

    Show detailed information of a specified Pipeline.

- **`pipeline log --lastExecution <name>`**

    Display the logs of the most recent PipelineExecution triggered by an event for a specified Pipeline.

##### 2. PipelineExecution Commands

- **`pipeline-execution list [--pipeline=<name>]`**
  
    List all PipelineExecution instances. The list includes each execution's event information and timestamp. 
    

>     If the `--pipeline` parameter is provided, only list PipelineExecutions belonging to a specific Pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If the `--pipeline` parameter is provided, only PipelineExecutions belonging to a specific Pipeline are listed.
```

Author: IMHO，they are essentially the same.

- **`pipeline-execution describe <name>`**

    Show detailed information of a specified PipelineExecution, including task composition, current status.

- **`pipeline-execution logs <name>`**

    Retrieve and display logs of a specified PipelineExecution.

#### Test Plan

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- Will there be e2e and integration tests, in addition to unit tests?
- How will it be tested in isolation vs with other components?

No need to outline all test cases, just the general strategy. Anything
that would count as tricky in the implementation, and anything particularly
challenging to test, should be called out.
-->

End-to-End Tests: Comprehensive E2E tests should be conducted to ensure the backup, restore, and migration processes work seamlessly across different clusters.

> Integration Tests: Integration tests should be designed to ensure Kurator's integration with Velero functions as expected.

Reviewer 2: Why Velero?

Author: it is a mistake

Unit Tests: Unit tests should cover the core functionalities and edge cases.

> Isolation Testing: The backup, restore, and migration functionalities should be tested in isolation and in conjunction with other components to ensure compatibility and performance.

Reviewer 2: Same problem as above.

---
title: Pipeline in Kurator
authors:
- "@Xieql"

>   reviewers:

Reviewer: remove indents

// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object
// +kubebuilder:object:root=true
// +kubebuilder:resource:scope=Namespaced,categories=kurator-dev
// +kubebuilder:subresource:status

// Pipeline is the top-level type for Kurator CI Pipeline.
type Pipeline struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	Spec   PipelineSpec   `json:"spec"`
	Status PipelineStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// PipelineSpec defines the desired state of a Pipeline.
type PipelineSpec struct {
	// Description allows an administrator to provide a description of the pipeline.
	// +optional
	Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`

	// Tasks is an ordered list of tasks in the pipeline, containing detailed information about each task. 
	// The tasks will be executed in the order they are listed.
	Tasks []PipelineTask `json:"tasks"`

	// SharedWorkspace is the name of the PVC. If not specified, a PVC with the Pipeline's name as prefix will be created by default.
	// If not set, Kurator will create a PVC named Pipeline.name using default config
	// +optional
	SharedWorkspace *string `json:"sharedWorkspace,omitempty"`
}

> type PipelineTask struct {

Reviewer: nit: remove pipeline prefix

	// Name is the name of the task.
	Name string `json:"name"`

	// PredefinedTask is a reference to a predefined task template.
	// Users should provide a PredefinedTask name from a predefined library.
	// +optional
	PredefinedTask *PredefinedTask `json:"predefinedTask,omitempty"`

	// CustomTask enables defining a task directly within the CRD if TaskRef is not used.

> 	// This should only be used when TaskRef is not provided.

Reviewer: s/TaskRef/PredefinedTask

	// +optional
	CustomTask *CustomTask `json:"customTask,omitempty"`

	// Retries represents how many times this task should be retried in case of task failure.
	// +optional
	Retries *int `json:"retries,omitempty"`
}

type PredefinedTask struct {
	// TaskType is used to specify the type of the predefined task.
	// This is a required field and determines which task template will be used.

> 	TaskType string `json:"taskType"`

Author: fiexd

	
	// Step's working directory.
	// If not specified, the container runtime's default will be used, which
	// might be configured in the container image.
	// Cannot be updated.
	// +optional
	WorkingDir string `json:"workingDir,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,5,opt,name=workingDir"`
	
	// List of environment variables to set in the Step.
	// Cannot be updated.
	// +optional
	// +patchMergeKey=name
	// +patchStrategy=merge
	// +listType=atomic
	Env []corev1.EnvVar `json:"env,omitempty" patchStrategy:"merge" patchMergeKey:"name" protobuf:"bytes,7,rep,name=env"`
	
	// ResourceRequirements required by this Step.
	// Cannot be updated.
	// More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/
	// +optional
	ResourceRequirements corev1.ResourceRequirements `json:"computeResources,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,8,opt,name=computeResources"`
	
	// Script is the contents of an executable file to execute.
	// If Script is not empty, the CustomTask cannot have a Command and the Args will be passed to the Script.
	// +optional
	Script string `json:"script,omitempty"`
}

type PipelineStatus struct {
	// Phase describes the overall state of the Pipeline.
	// +optional

> 	Phase *string `json:"phase,omitempty"`

Author: yes,we need more details

> 	Phase *string `json:"phase,omitempty"`

Author: more details has been added

    // EventListenerServiceName specifies the name of the service created by Kurator for event listeners. 
    // This name is useful for users when setting up a gateway service and routing to this service.
    // +optional

>     EventListenerServiceName *string `json:"eventListenerServiceName,omitempty"`

Reviewer: indent

Author: I'm not sure what the 'indent' means here

Author: fixed

}

// PipelineList contains a list of Pipeline.
// +kubebuilder:object:root=true
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object
type PipelineList struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	Items           []Pipeline `json:"items"`
}
```

#### How to use pipeline

> ![use-pipeline](./image/use-pipeline.svg)

Author: ok
